Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Almost with the publication of her first
novel in 1976, C.J. Cherryh became one of the most popular science fiction
writers working today. That first novel was Gate of Ivrel. Cherryh added two more
books to make it a trilogy, Well of Shiuan and Fires of Azeroth. And for Well of
Shiuan, she was given the John W. Campbell Award as the Best New Writer of the
Year. Cherryh has published some 15 novels since 1976, a very quick pace. Some of
her better-known books include the Faded Sun Trilogy, Brothers of Earth, Downbelow
Station, The Pride of Chanur, and Hunter of Worlds. In 1978, she won a
Hugo Award for the short story "Cassandra". We asked Cherryh if she'd been reading
science fiction since childhood. Yes, I started reading science fiction, I
suppose, is about the earliest form of literature that I read. I never made a
mental distinction between science fiction, fantasy, anything of that nature,
because my parents brought it to me to read, and I just simply regarded it as
the most interesting reading material that I had accessible. So naturally, when
I began turning to writing, that's what I wrote. She went on to tell us why she
decided to start writing science fiction. Actually, they took my television
program off the air. Our television, at that time, I was 10. Television hadn't
been around in private homes very long. I had just time enough to get thoroughly
addicted to television science fiction, and then it ran its course and it was
gone from the air. So I, in a fit of mourning, went into the bedroom, picked up
a tablet and pencil, and started writing my own novels. Cherryh is a talented
writer with a flair for style and structure. She might have been successful in
any form of writing she chose to pursue. She tells us why she didn't write other
kinds of books. Well, I didn't write the other things because I didn't like
them. In general, I find that, I
suppose the only thing outside of science fiction that I've ever tried my hand
at writing has been mysteries. And I don't care for the modern fashion of those.
I've always viewed them as a great deal more fun to read than they are to write,
mostly because you have to be extremely controlled. And I suspect that mystery
writers have to know who did it. And I'd rather not know the end of my books.
The other thing that I've tried my hand at is historical fiction. And I find,
again, that's a straitjacket because you're rather well held with what's
happened, whether or not it makes artistic sense. So, just for the sheer
pleasure of writing, I prefer science fiction. Donald Wollheim, the owner and
editor of DAW Books, discovered Cherryh when she sent him the manuscript for
Gate of Ivrel. She explains why she picked Wollheim. I grew fascinated with
Wollheim as an editor because I had gone through my library, finally, after seven
years of trying to sell things. And I thought, well, there must be a system to
this. You see, I had no professional help at all. And I began searching my
library to see what editor had published the majority of works and writers that
I liked, figuring that we might have something in common as far as taste goes.
So, I began researching Don Wollheim to see what his preferences were, where we
differed, and where we were similar. And so, I began to conclude more and more
that we were fairly well synthetico when it came to taste. Not quite the same
all the way down the line, but generally there's a broad area of overlap. So, I
found him very easy to work with. We'll have more with C.J. Cherryh next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. C.J. Cherryh published her first novel, Gate
of Ivrel, in 1976. It was well received. Cherryh quickly built up a following of
readers and was acknowledged as one of the best new writers around. The
popularity of Gate of Ivrel was one reason Cherryh wrote two others on the same
subject, to form a trilogy. The second book was Well of Shiuan, and the third
Fires of Azeroth. The trilogy is exciting heroic fantasy that takes place on an
alien world. There are two main characters, Morgaine, a beautiful woman who
wields a magic sword, and Vanye, a man who has vowed to help her in a difficult
task. Morgaine's task is to destroy a space-time gate left on Vanye's world. The
gate is a still-functioning artifact left by a vanished race, the khal. The gate
can be used to travel in time or space, transporting anyone who enters it to
other places and times. But the gate, and others like it on other planets, is a
danger to the universe. That sounds like science fiction, but it's not. The
story occurs on a primitive planet with no technology. Vanye and his people
regard the gate as an object of magic and superstitiously avoid it. They also
consider Morgaine as an evil sorceress. Her knowledge of technology to them is
simply mysterious magic. So the novel is fantasy. The fighting is done with
swords and transportation is by horse. Much of Cherryh's later writing is
straight science fiction with a large amount of hard science in it. We asked her
why she started out with fantasy. Well, I didn't. They weren't the first books
that I had written. There are others which are tentative efforts that didn't pan
out in one way or another. Everybody, I won't say everybody, but a majority of
writers tend to have them. My first love is really technology. The only thing is
that I had been out of the technological mainstream while they had made numerous
scientific advances that I was not current with. and it annoys me a great deal
to feel that I'm writing something that is not technically accurate or that I
have glossed over something. It irritates me personally to postulate, well, for
instance, we have a gravity field here which keeps everyone's feet on the deck.
I want to know how it works. So, consequently, I wrote heroic fantasy while I
was doing a great deal of reading in Scientific American. Also, heroic fantasy
is an area where I have a good deal of expertise since I have a major in
classics,
history, archaeology, anthropology, this sort of thing. But I had always been a
sort of a hobbyist and a little more than a hobbyist since it was one of my
fields in the history of technology. Throughout the three books, we learn very
little about the background of Morgaine. We ask Cherryh if perhaps Morgaine is a
force or a creature who existed even before the khal, the builders of the gates.
Well, actually, now there's some of this that I'm not about to give away as
regards to the history of Morgaine because that gets into the possibility of a
book that I'm working on at the moment. The first set of the books, the gate
books, involve much more the character of Vanye, who is a medieval man. I have
to take his viewpoint or they cease to be heroic fantasy and they begin to be a
science fiction novel, pure and simple, because Morgaine is far more
technologically sophisticated than he is. And if it were told from her
viewpoint, it would begin to be a thing of numbers and calculus.
Morgaine is far more advanced exactly where she comes from and what she is. I've
preferred to leave to the reader's estimation, although I will say that your
surmises are fairly well down the center. We'll talk with C.J. Cherryh about some
of her other books next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. C.J. Cherryh's 1982 novel, The Pride of
Chanur, is a fascinating depiction of alien cultures. Essentially, there's only
one human in the entire book, a wretched man named Tully, who's been picked up
after an accident aboard his spaceship. The aliens who end up with him are
called the Hani. We are with the Hani for the length of the novel, seeing
everything from their alien perspective. The Hani look and act like lions. We
asked Cherryh if this was deliberate. Yes, absolutely. This is one case where
I've taken the species of lions and, in a very simple way, devised a culture of
an advanced species, which very closely parallels the biology and, if you will,
social patterns of a lion pride. But the title of the book, of course, is a
three-way pun. As an alert reader soon figures out, there is a three-way pun on
the title of Pride of Chanur. Pride of lions. The pride characteristic of the
Hani species. And the name of the Hani spaceship, which is called the Pride of
Chanur. Tully, the human who falls into Hani hands and gets mixed up in an
interstellar war, is a pitiful creature who both fears and needs the Hani.
Cherryh explains why he instinctively fears the lion-like species. Have you ever
seen a baboon react to a leopard? It's raw terror. A primate's nervous system is
not really set up to be setting in the center of a pride of lions. It's really
one of the most unkind things, I believe, that you could do to a human being, as
far as social patterns would be, to drop them right into the middle of a feline
culture because the moves are all wrong. Well, for
instance, Tully, being a primate, smiles. And, of course, this is exactly the
wrong thing to do. You know what a lion does when it smiles. It's not a friendly
gesture. Every gesture he makes is wrong. Every gesture they make is wrong, at
least as far as he's concerned. In his own way, though, Cherryh says, Tully acts
with courage. He is, however, a very heroic human being, if you just simply
analyze what he has done. He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation.
He has managed to collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which
would have broken drastically. Any average individual would have definitely come
out of it damaged. He's been forced to take horrendous decisions, and he's been
dumped into a situation where even his personal value is of some question. And
yet he manages to stand up on his hind feet and confront the Hani captain with
a here-I-am-come-and-see-if-you-can-do-something-about-it kind of attitude,
which is, of course, what wins the captain's respect in the beginning. He calms
down a little bit, as you will see, when he begins trying to deal with them,
doing what any sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where
you suspect that the beings around you are at least essentially friendly, and
there's no need provoking something that would be a total misunderstanding. So
he does remain a little bit quiet, but he's quiet partially because he's smart
and is trying to absorb more data than he gives out. The Pride of Chanur is a
typical C.J. Cherryh narrative, well plotted with finely drawn alien cultures and
full of exciting and realistic space battles. And that's what we've come to
expect from Cherryh. She doesn't seem to know how to write a bad book. More with
C.J. Cherryh on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. One of the finest science fiction trilogies
in recent years is C.J. Cherryh's Faded Sun series. It was published in the late
1970s under the titles Kesrith, Shon'Jir, and Kutath. There are few books in
science fiction that present an alien culture with the sensitivity and depth
that Cherryh has given to one of the alien races in the trilogy, the Mri. The
Mri are nomadic tribesmen of the desert. They are great warriors, and
spacefaring races employ them as mercenaries. Cherryh says she didn't pattern the
Mri on any modern nomadic cultures, but she used her knowledge of ancient
history. When I did the Faded Sun novels, which are basically a desert culture,
I did not pattern it off any modern desert culture about which I know, frankly,
nothing. I patterned it strictly by taking what I know about desert survival and
earlier nomadic cultures here on Earth, contrived
a biology that would work under the extreme conditions that I postulated, and
then drew elements from here and there. It's very strange that I now get letters
from people that say that it very closely resembles a modern terrestrial nomadic
culture. But this is strictly a surprise to me. I suppose it just says that I
knew something about the very ancient one. We asked Cherryh what she most admired
about the Mri. I think that, for one thing, about the Mri, I think I admire
their steadfastness.
Their ability to face time itself with tranquility, in the sense that they can
take the long view, which is a thing that is absolutely necessary in my mind for
civilized survival. In my mind, I don't say just survival, but civilized
survival. Is their ability to look down the centuries and see consequences. The
Mri sense of time is a very strange thing. A Mri always lives now, and that
now is a composite of the past, current events, and the future simultaneously.
They do not view time as the modern American does, which is more or less a set
of beads on the string that we can snip off any tail of the string that seems
inconvenient to us. The Mri concept of the universe is holistic. The Mri have
almost been wiped out because they've been used as pawns in an interstellar war
between humans and another alien culture, the Regul. Duncan, a human who's been
partly responsible for the Mri's seemingly certain demise, is conscience
-stricken at the possible end of such a beautiful and ancient culture. His
solution is to attempt to become a Mri, although it may kill him and will
certainly destroy his humanity. His final sacrifice, in a sort of a redemptive
sense, is that he finally agrees that he will no longer attempt to be human. He
begins to try to be something else. Even in that, there is a considerable
hazard, because if the transition is not complete, he may end up by
contaminating the culture, which to the Mri and their way of life is a very,
very serious thing. But it is a voluntary and conscious decision
that effectively it is personal suicide. And he takes it because he feels
responsible for what has happened. Duncan's attempt to become a Mri is one of
the most sensitive treatments of human-alien contact in science fiction. We'll
have more with C.J. Cherryh on our next program.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Hunter of Worlds, a 1977 novel by C.J.
Cherryh, is a different sort of science fiction book, a difficult one that
surprised a few of its readers. Cherryh has created a language for one of the
alien cultures in the novel, and the narrative is sprinkled with strange words
that slow a reader down. Cherryh admits that Hunter of Worlds is different from
other works. Hunter of Worlds is constructed for different reasons. Usually when
I use alien languages in a book, it is not for local color. It's just that when
you run across anybody's civilization, which is vastly different than your own,
you're going to come across three or four words, which cannot be translated, no
matter how you would like to. It's just that not all languages have words for
concepts.
Well, you know, like in English, you can think of several things that you can
say that you can't say in French and vice versa, which is why language borrows
words from other languages. When I did Hunter of Worlds, I was doing something
totally different, and it is an experimental novel, and it is not a novel that I
recommend to someone who is not used to science fiction or not used to language
one or the other. Basically on that one, the very premise of the book is
linguistics, treating the science of linguistics, as you will, as seriously as
you treat physics in a science fiction novel. I deliberately set out to make a
language which is not based on any earthly model. I even changed the rules of
grammar to something that, as far as I know, is not directly based on any
grammatical system on the face of the earth. The thing is explained in an
appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing. Cherryh has
some advice for those who read the novel. There are several ways to read the
book. The recommended one is as the viewpoint character sees it. Frankly, the
viewpoint character is confused to all get out most of the time. He doesn't
understand. So you can equally well appreciate the book simply by realizing that
from his viewpoint, a lot of these people are speaking things at him which he in
no wise comprehends. The trouble with the book is that, of course, at several
points, he's vastly mistaken about what he thinks he understands. So the book
does have some pitfalls in it for somebody who is accustomed to believing
everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo be the truth because he
is very, very frequently mistaken or very, very frequently picks up a concept
which is not the whole concept and gradually begins to arrive at an
understanding of what's going on toward the end of the book that I must warn
everyone that even at the end he is somewhat mistaken. Cherryh says she has a
special affection for the novel. Hunter of Worlds. I like, I think, partly
because it's a kind of book that I wanted to write and I got away with it. Don
Wollheim was very, very understanding in that department because I think many
editors would have come and said, well, yes, but no one will understand those
words. You've got to change them to English and that would have defeated the
entire purpose of the book. And that one is sort of a, one of the very, very
strange books that I can reread and find something I didn't know was there. It's
just kind of an odd feeling.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.